Welcome back.
So global variables are bad.
They can cause a lot of issues and how can we minimize them.
With modern javascript we have things like e s modules and module bundlers something we're going to
talk about a little bit later on in the course.
But before we had those things javascript developers used what we know now about the language itself
to avoid this global variable issue and it's called and iffy or an immediately invoked function expression.
Let's see what it looks like.
And if he is a function expression that looks something like this.
Here we go.
Confused.
Don't be because we already know this and we should already understand what the JavaScript engine is
going to do with this code.
You see if these are common javascript design pattern used by a lot of popular libraries especially
back in the day like J query or even backbone J Yes.
The idea was using this pattern we can place all library code inside of local scope to avoid any namespace
collisions.
So let's have a look one by one.
The first thing we're doing is we're saying with this brackets Hey this isn't a function declaration.
It's a function expression right.
Because the JavaScript engine won't see function as the first item on the line.
Instead it's going to see these brackets.
So this automatically makes it into a function expression.
And then after we've done that we've created an anonymous function.
There's no name attached to this function.
And then we immediately invoke it.
That is we call the function.
So if I run this while I get undefined OK.
But just to test our assumption.
What if I do something like this.
What if I use a function declaration and call it immediately afterwards so that's our function declaration.
And then right afterwards I'm going to call it I'm going to get a syntax error.
You can't really call a function declaration immediately after a function expression.
However you can now what's the benefit in doing this.
You see since the anonymous function within this if he is a function expression and it's not being assigned
to any global variables no global property is really being created.
Is there and all of the properties created inside over here are going to be scoped inside here.
So it's only going to be available inside this if the but not outside.
If I have variable A equals 2 1.
Well I can't really access a a is not defined.
Let's have a look at a diagram and immediately invoked function.
Expression simply allows us to call immediately as javascript is executing it's going to define what
it is.
And right afterwards with the brackets it's going to call it.
It's going to create a new variable environment a new execution context that's going to have our own
Variable Scope and this allows us to attach private data right in here that can be accessed by the global
execution context because while the chain runs downward.
Now before I get into an example let me just show you one other thing.
What do you think happens if I remove or move these brackets to inside over here.
Will anything change.
No it doesn't.
We're still following the rules of JavaScript right.
We have the function expression because of the parentheses.
And then right after the compiler looks through the code and says All right here's the function we're
immediately going to run it.
Let's see this in action imagine I create a another function here I'm going to call it function a another
original name and this function is just going to return fire.
If I refresh this function and I do a I get fired that makes sense but then all of a sudden this little
bugger over here decides to pollute my name space and create its own function a that mocks me and just
last me so that now if I refresh and run a oh boy just laughing at me ridiculing me.
So how can we use if these to solve this problem.
And this is how we worked.
Back in the day before we had.
Yes modules against something we're gonna discuss in our modules section of the course I can create
a variable let's call it script 1 and this script 1 is going to equal function a or we can even leave
out the name if we wanted to.
And within this function because this is a function expression I can wrap it in brackets and then immediately
invoke.
So let's see what happens now.
I'm going to save and refresh if I call a I get hahaha Okay nothing's changed.
Instead of returning 5 I'm going to create my function again function a and this function a loops let's
make sure we fix that this function a will now have return 5 and all we need to do is just return from
here an object with a as
so that if I save here and refresh let's say I run a again while I get hahaha but now within my script
one dot a I can run this and look at that I have access to a because script 1 now returns an object
that contains this a function for me now the interesting thing with this is that while we still have
a global namespace we still created this script.
One global variable but the good thing is that we can just have one variable and this variable can be
an object that contains many properties that we might want to use and it only pollutes the global namespace
once more importantly we're attaching this private data to a function that creates fresh environments
for us it executes them and it only allows us to return whatever we want from inside this function now.
Libraries like Jake we used to do this a lot.
For example let's clear this and add a J query library at the very top of our file here.
This is a J query code right at the top.
So that now we'll have access to the J squared library.
This means that anything that comes after this script.
Well because everything gets combined in the script acts we can use J courier now.
So let's do that.
Let's have a function that lets say instead of this function A will do the J query syntax to grab H1
which is this.
Hello.
Over here and we'll just say on click we want to run a callback function that simply well let's say
hides the hello.
So I can do this here if I want but that's a topic we're gonna get into a little bit later on.
So let's just stick with each one dot.
Hide and see what happens here and for now let's just not return anything just an empty object.
I'm going to refresh if I click here.
Look at that.
It's working.
It disappeared.
We have access to this dollar sign because Jay Query provides for us the ability to use this from its
library because it's added it to the window object.
If I go to window dot dollar sign there we have something here.
I can also do window dot J query.
And again same thing now.
J.
Query inside of this library has a ton of functions a ton of variables but inside it they can just create
an iffy and just expose for us this J query object that we can use so let's play with something here.
If in this parentheses remember this is us executing this function if I add J query here.
Here after we call this function this function is going to receive this J query parameter and we'll
make this J query parameter 0 AMG that says 0 AMG Well this should still work right.
This 0 AMG syntax if I refresh let's save and refresh and I click here still disappears because what
I've done is I've added J query from the global namespace as a parameter on to my immediately invoked
function and this function when it gets called it's going to receive a parameter which is J.
Query and we're just assigning get a variable O M G but this O M G still has whatever this library gave
us so I can use it whatever way I want inside here.
Now the interesting thing here is that we actually have a bit of a performance benefit here because
before we didn't have this when we looked at the dollar sign we would go up the scope chain to the global
namespace and find the dollar sign and what it means.
But this time around because we've added our J query library as a parameter it doesn't look in the global
namespace right.
Instead it looks at its local scope which includes the parameter that we had.
So we technically get a bit of a speed boost because we're not doing that scope chain lookup as a matter
of fact we can do something fun here let's change this back to the dollar sign and now return the dollar
sign to just equal height if I do this and I refresh and I run script 1 dot dollar sign you see that
within this function within this script we've all over written whatever the dollar sign wants and is
just high completely useless to us.
Immediately invoked function expressions are something we're gonna get into it a little bit more when
we talk about modules but want to introduce them to you now because as you can see they take advantage
of what we learned about scope it enables us to attach private data to a function and it creates a fresh
environment for us so that we don't pollute our global execution context.
As we start to get more and more JavaScript files we want to make sure that we can wrap things in a
function to scope things into their own environments and minimize the amount of data that we place on
the global execution context.
I'll see in the next one.
Bobby.